In Latin, and in English until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant astrology (or sometimes astronomy) rather than mathematics. The resulting Euclidean geometry is the study of shapes and their arrangements constructed from lines, planes and circles in the Euclidean plane (plane geometry) and the (three-dimensional) Euclidean space.Euclidean geometry was developed without change of methods or scope until the 17th century, when René Descartes introduced what is now called Cartesian coordinates. This was a major change of paradigm, since instead of defining real numbers as lengths of line segments (see number line), it allowed the representation of points using their coordinates (which are numbers). This allows one to use algebra (and later, calculus) to solve geometrical problems. This split geometry into two new subfields: synthetic geometry, which uses purely geometrical methods, and analytic geometry, which uses coordinates systemically. Analytic geometry allows the study of curves that are not related to circles and lines. Such curves can be defined as graph of functions (whose study led to differential geometry). They can also be defined as implicit equations, often polynomial equations (which spawned algebraic geometry). Analytic geometry also makes it possible to consider spaces of higher than three dimensions.In the 19th century, mathematicians discovered non-Euclidean geometries, which do not follow the parallel postulate. By questioning the truth of that postulate, this discovery joins Russels paradox as revealing the foundational crisis of mathematics. This aspect of the crisis was solved by systematizing the axiomatic method, and adopting that the truth of the chosen axioms is not a mathematical problem. In turn, the axiomatic method allows for the study of various geometries obtained either by changing the axioms or by considering properties that are invariant under specific transformations of the space.Nowadays, the subareas of geometry include: Projective geometry, Affine geometry, Differential geometry,Manifold theory,Riemannian geometry, Algebraic geometry, Discrete geometry,Convex geometry, Complex geometry. Algebra is the art of manipulating equations and formulas. Diophantus (3rd century) and al-Khwarizmi (9th century) were the two main precursors of algebra. The first one solved some equations involving unknown natural numbers by deducing new relations until he obtained the solution. The second one introduced systematic methods for transforming equations (such as moving a term from a side of an equation into the other side). The term algebra is derived from the Arabic word aljabr meaning the reunion for broken parts that he used for naming one of these methods in the title of his main treatise.The quadratic formula, which concisely expresses the solutions of all quadratic equations. Algebra became an area in its own right only with François Viète (1540–1603), who introduced the use of letters (variables) for representing unknown or unspecified numbers. This allows mathematicians to describe the operations that have to be done on the numbers represented using mathematical formulas. Until the 19th century, algebra consisted mainly of the study of linear equations (presently linear algebra), and polynomial equations in a single unknown, which were called algebraic equations (a term that is still in use, although it may be ambiguous). During the 19th century, mathematicians began to use variables to represent things other than numbers (such as matrices, modular integers, and geometric transformations), on which generalizations of arithmetic operations are often valid. The concept of algebraic structure addresses this, consisting of a set whose elements are unspecified, of operations acting on the elements of the set, and rules that these operations must follow. Due to this change, the scope of algebra grew to include the study of algebraic structures. This object of algebra was called modern algebra or abstract algebra. (The latter term appears mainly in an educational context, in opposition to elementary algebra, which is concerned with the older way of manipulating formulas.) Rubiks cube: the study of its possible moves is a concrete application of group theory. Some types of algebraic structures have useful and often fundamental properties, in many areas of mathematics. In practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences, notably deductive reasoning from assumptions. Mathematicians develop mathematical hypotheses, known as conjectures, using trial and error with intuition too, similarly to scientists.Experimental mathematics and computational methods like simulation also continue to grow in importance within mathematics. Today, all sciences pose problems studied by mathematicians, and conversely, results from mathematics often lead to new questions and realizations in the sciences. For example, the physicist Richard Feynman combined mathematical reasoning and physical insight to invent the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics. String theory, on the other hand, is a proposed framework for unifying much of modern physics that has inspired new techniques and results in mathematics.The German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss called mathematics the Queen of the Sciences, and more recently, Marcus du Sautoy has described mathematics as the main driving force behind scientific discovery. However, some authors emphasize that mathematics differs from the modern notion of science in a major way: it does not rely on empirical evidence.Mathematical knowledge has exploded in scope since the Scientific Revolution, and as with other fields of study, this has driven specialization. As of 2010, the latest Mathematics Subject Classification of the American Mathematical Society recognizes hundreds of subfields, with the full classification reaching 46 pages. Typically, many concepts in a subfield can remain isolated from other branches of mathematics indefinitely; results may serve primarily as scaffolding to support other theorems and techniques, or they may not have a clear relation to anything outside the subfield.Mathematics shows a remarkable tendency to evolve though, and in time, mathematicians often discover surprising applications or links between concepts. One very influential instance of this was the Erlangen program of Felix Klein, which established innovative and profound links between geometry and algebra. This in turn opened up both fields to greater abstraction and spawned entirely new subfields.A distinction is often made between applied mathematics and mathematics oriented entirely towards abstract questions and concepts, known as pure mathematics. As with other divisions of mathematics though, the boundary is fluid. Ideas that initially develop with a specific application in mind are often generalized later, thereupon joining the general stock of mathematical concepts. Several areas of applied mathematics have even merged with practical fields to become disciplines in their own right, such as statistics, operations research, and computer science.Perhaps even more surprising is when ideas flow in the other direction, and even the purest mathematics lead to unexpected predictions or applications. For example, number theory occupies a central place in modern cryptography, and in physics, derivations from Maxwell's equations preempted experimental evidence of radio waves and the constancy of the speed of light. Physicist Eugene Wigner has named this phenomenon the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.The uncanny connection between abstract mathematics and material reality has led to philosophical debates since at least the time of Pythagoras. The ancient philosopher Plato argued this was possible because material reality reflects abstract objects that exist outside time. As a result, the view that mathematical objects somehow exist on their own in abstraction is often referred to as Platonism. While most mathematicians don't typically concern themselves with the questions raised by Platonism, some more philosophically-minded ones do identify as Platonists, even in contemporary times.